---
layout: post
title: "Nihilism and Suicide"
permalink: nihilism-suicide
tags: theory nihilism
---

In the second part of his introduction, titled *An experiment in Nihilism*, Mitchell introduces the task at hand. This is perhaps the most crucial part of his piece, if it is to be treated with any seriousness. What is the philosophical problem that he intends to address, if any? We find what might be his crucial question in the following:

> Unbelieving in nihilism, I confront unbelief without believing in it. Because unbelief, so defined, is a not an abstract position, but the result of discerning a lack of ground for the various instances of belief I encounter, an experiment in nihilism so conceived amounts, not to the paradoxes of rational argument, but an empirical demonstration of the lack of ground for instances of belief. So instead of a purely rational argument, I will design and conduct an experiment to test the proposition of the meaninglessness of life.

From the outset he acknowledges the paradox inherent in nihilism, but unfortunately strives to resolve it. He rightly remarks: “How can I believe in disbelief?” only to redefine nihilism: “So called ‘nihilism’… is more unbelief than belief in disbelief.” This is somewhat disappointing, clumsily dodging the prominent issue of how does one talk *of* nihilism, rather than about nihilism as if it is utterly opaque. He then supposes that philosophy aims to identify what questions are important (‘what is the meaning [or point] of life’ seems to be an appropriate example) and that his task, informed by nihilism, is to determine whether there are any important questions. “[T]he most important question is whether there is an important question. The only serious question is whether there is anything to take seriously.” This is truly his saving grace, the ingenious point at which we can begin to talk about nihilism. Prior to this question, all we could do was mention nihilism as a looming existential spectre haunting the Western zeitgeist. Now, thanks to Mitchell, we can *do nihilism*, paradoxically though, because it has become important, it has value.

<hr>

It might seem that he enters into his treatise with an agenda when he dives straight into a virulent onslaught against the bias of the living against death. Quite rightly, he notes the lack of any non-circular recourse (as he terms it, a lack of *rationality*) backing up the value invested in life by the living. He seems to somewhat gleefully leap from the supposition that rationality cannot attribute value in living to the supposition that rationality leads inexorably to nihilism. “Could suicide represent the pinnacle of the rational life realized?”

> If reason is incapable of deducing ultimate, nonarbitrary human ends, and nothing can be judged as ultimately more important than anything else, then freedom is equal to slavery; cruelty is equal to kindness; love is equal to hate; war is equal to peace; dignity is equal to contempt; destruction is equal to creation; life is equal to death and death is equal to life.

An easy retort to this might be that totalitarian rationality may indeed draw us towards nihilism, but only if we accept rationality as our flawlessly comprehensive and dogmatic method of thought or behaviour. In effect, the nihilism here stems more from the totalitarian dogmatism being applied to rationality than it does from rationality itself. If, on the other hand, we take rationality as a method of thinking that proves useful to us in certain situations, but not all, we might find ourselves much more cautious about this point. For instance, we might want to take pity on the couple who procreate under purely rational auspices, or the child who doesn’t smile when playing and learning but completely and solely rationally embarks upon their development. We might feel that they had missed something important from living.

<hr>

He also looks to draw from a linear progression of liberationism, contrasting this against an “Aristotelian, teleological conception of nature; a nature of natural slaves, natural aristocracy, natural patriarchy, natural inferiority of women, natural racial kinds, natural heterosexuality and, finally, natural self-preservation.”

> Just as it was considered unnatural or even insane that men be loosed from “natural” subordination to their king, or that women be unchained from “natural” subordination to their fathers and husbands, today it is considered unnatural that death be liberated from its “natural” subordination to the tyranny of life.

He sees liberationism as an unrelenting force, that subordination of all kinds can and will be culturally undermined. There is a strong implicit connection here that suggests that progressive liberation is a direct child of rationalist practice, a point which isn’t controversial at all. What is controversial, however, is the following notion – that if rationalism is inherently nihilistic and progressive liberationism is a direct practice of rationalism, then progressive liberation is a nihilistic practice – or is at least guided and, in a sense, motivated by nihilism. This supposition is very much to the contrary of virtually all philosophical, strategic and policy works on liberation – to suggest that the suffrage movement was working towards nihilism might be met with vehement, perhaps violent, denial. Indeed, it is not controversial at all to suppose that liberation movements have generally been guided by a strong sense of morality, importance and value, rather than its opposite. Is there any salvaging of this analysis of liberationism? Liberationism has taken more recently to right-to-die causes and, in the spirit of liberation and fundamental morality, a liberationist-minded individual might want to hold a person’s own choice as to whether they live or die as being tantamount to a sacred, privileged right. But that in itself is a long way from it being ‘right’ to self-annihilate. Is this not the point of Mitchell’s Suicide Note? Not that Mitchell was free to kill himself (this is evident from the fact that he did, nor is it within the field of philosophy), nor that death and life be held in equal regard – but that death ought to be held in higher regard than life. What would make this Suicide Note philosophical would be a text that a reader can confront, with the question in mind: *Should I too kill myself?*

<hr>

Although Mitchell is quite adamant in this chapter that the roots of his philosophy are rationalism and liberationism, there are inconsistencies in marrying these two with nihilism. We have seen that rationalism cannot attribute value to living, but it is a non sequitur to say that rationalism favours death. We have also seen that liberationism is informed by a decidedly ethical approach and not by nihilism. But it is to nihilism that he returns and thereby redeems his task and experiment. His grounding in nihilism is so far sufficiently solid for us to continue with his work, if for any reason then to find out by what method he begins to search for the answer to the most important question – is there an important question?

> Only by ruthlessly exposing the comfortable biases towards existence can one reckon with the implications of the valuelessness of existence.

Standing at the foot of his mountainous task, he is ready to shed the heavy load we all carry and stand before us naked but invulnerable. It matters less how he reached this point when we consider the heights he could reach.
