---
layout: post
title: "Biopolitics of the Panoptical 'Light' Web"
permalink: biopolitics-panoptical-light-web
tags: theory
---

Visiting a website is a complex undertaking, though less so for the visitor themselves. While retrieving information, making a purchase or disseminating your latest selfie is a task that website providers go to great lengths to make as easy to do as possible, the mechanics of what actually occurs during each of these tasks is growing increasingly intricate. The process by which the apparatuses are optimised is inherently responsive — and in order to respond one must first observe.

This observation qua data collection is largely automated, with visitor activities being recorded as meticulously as would be expected of a computational mechanism. Though mostly only trends are eventually viewed by a human being, this automated surveillance from an obfuscated position is an issue of biopolitical significance.

By looking at surveilled (light) and non-surveilled (dark) web paradigms we can make conclusions about the difference surveillance makes. In order to examine the biopolitical impact of surveillance, this essay will principally reference some crucial texts of Foucault (for an essential notion of biopower) and Hardt & Negri (for an expanded notion of biopower in a modern, global context).

The paradigm of the surveilled internet we will look at is quite conventional and commonplace — the use of user data and processing services that are implemented on many websites. Then we will look at the less common (though growing) phenomenon of open source cryptography technologies, in particular cryptocurrency, as paradigmatic of the anti-surveillance movement.

<hr>

The Foucauldian paradigm of surveillance as biopower is a redescription of Bentham’s Panopticon. The Panopticon was designed and posited as a penal institution, whereby radially segmented areas in a circular structure can be totally observed from a position of total privacy via a central tower. The principle disciplinary advantage of this structure is that inhabitants of areas would be unaware at any point that they were being observed — reinforcing the idea that they could be being watched at any time. In this way, administrators could ensure that behavioural standards were maintained without the need for constant vigilance. In fact, the constant threat of vigilance serves this purpose adequately well.

As Foucault puts it, the Panopticon “is the diagram of a mechanism of power reduced to its ideal form” and is a structure that could be applied equally well to hospitals, schools, etc — any institution whereby control is exerted on behaviour relies on such a mechanism in order to manage a large ratio of observers to observees.

> The Panopticon[…] has a role of amplification; although it arranges power, although it is intended to make it more economic and more effective, it does so not for power itself, nor for the immediate salvation of a threatened society: its aim is to strengthen the social forces — to increase production, to develop the economy, spread education, raise the level of public morality; to increase and multiply.

Where the Panopticon is the ideal architecture of power mechanisms, either physically through a building like a prison or psychologically in an open city using the proliferation of CCTV, we can see surveillance and biopolitics as being intrinsically linked. Without surveillance, biopower can only be maintained by exercising punishment upon those who are ‘caught in the act’, whereas through surveillance the threat of observation and punishment has a more spectacular, but similar, effect.

Regarding the activities and interactions of the body as the conduit and flow of power has increased the value in knowing how these activities and interactions operate. Knowing *that* bodily relations are decisive in the ebbs and flows of power is less potent, perhaps even useless, without having some ongoing perception of *what* bodily relations are taking place and trending.

It is for this reason that “communication has increasingly become the fabric of production” — that what data assembling and processing technology produces (information) is of such growing political importance that it has a greater economic significance, with all of the social morphology that entails (without presupposing causation either way).

These flows of communication, upon which we now place increasing value, can be divided like any other mode of production — into raw material (randomness), process and processing equipment, and product (pattern). Like the automotive industry of the 20th century that broke down into steel and plastic, plant and workforce, and the vehicle product, the information industry can be broken down by relationships between bodies, information processing, and marked-up data. In the case of information flows, this division loops back on itself much more — information is processed and reprocessed in order to bring forth particular patterns and trends and to be of interest to particular audiences.

Such patterns and trends are of immense value to those seeking to affect behaviour changes, to engage in biopolitics. Governments, businesses and other parties and institutions, insofar as they are engaged in instigating social effects, use this information to make judgements about the behaviour changes they seek to promote. These sought behaviour changes are varied and are directly linked to the objectives of the institution, such as reducing the number of people who smoke tobacco, increasing the use of soap (or a particular brand of soap) or decreasing tolerance of immigration amongst a national population. In doing so, wider objectives can be measurably affected such as making long-term savings in the National Health Service, affecting the spread of certain diseases or creating an environment where a particular kind of ideology can grow. These objectives are often linked to larger, wider strategies still.

The rendering of the randomness of raw data into patterns that can be used to measure such objectives is a key concern in biopolitics, and so there is plenty of motivation to increase the application of quantitative data methods. This is made much easier where bodies enter into an information-processing environment where the modes of interaction are precisely mediated — where bodies interact with information processing machines *on the machines’ terms* — such as the Internet.

Though a turn of phrase, interacting ‘on the machine’s terms’ means what Galloway refers to as protocol in controlled environments and networks, which he says is “related to a biopolitical production, a *production of the possibility for experience*” (emphasis added). That the very possibility for experience in a virtual or constructed environment is produced by the establishing protocols further emphasises the determinism of interacting in predefined, marked-up ways.

In the virtual environment of the internet, not only can the interactions with information processing environments be carefully constructed and determined, but also the monitoring of behaviour within these processing environments can be conducted everywhere and invisibly. When ‘landing on’ a web page, a visitor has options to interact with the site’s databases in predefined ways like submitting personal information, making purchases and being audience to various media.

While interacting with the site in these prescribed ways, the site can also collect a range of other data that is completely automated and less based on explicitly requesting/volunteering. The precise journey the visitor takes through this environment is collected meticulously as a matter of course without the user being directly aware of this surveillance. What you do, whether or not your actions satisfy the objectives of the site and what may have motivated your behaviour, is recorded en masse to be periodically processed in an audit of the utility of this processing environment. It is, in this sense, a Panoptical web on which we surf, where while inhabiting the environment your every move is utterly visible to the administrator and invisible to your fellow site visitors.

Perhaps the most well-known single apparatus of the Panoptical web is a product which Google provides for anybody who manages a web presence capable of facilitating JavaScript: namely [Analytics](http://www.google.com/analytics).

Using a short tracking code that interfaces with a much larger information system, granular and analysable records are kept for every visitor to a website. This data includes by default information about location of visitors (accessible down to the city level), the technology used to access the site (operating system, screen size, etc), which pages they visit and for how long, from where they arrive at the site and how they leave it, and the precise journey they take through the content of that site. The script can be customised in ways that allow web managers to monitor all kinds of interactions on the site, and of course other proprietary scripts can provide yet more data on users.

For the most part, Google Analytics provides a method for people to see how many people visit their site and what they do there. At a very basic level they can see how their content performs in terms of their aims; whether it is to gain exposure for particular media content, or to encourage the further exchange of information like email addresses, bank details for transactions and social media resources. At another level, Analytics provides an insight into the people who engage with the web content in order to reach conclusions about how to better meet their desires/needs. For instance, discovering that mobile visits in particular tend towards a low engagement level then perhaps investigation is warranted into making the site more mobile-friendly. Or discovering that a large number of visits are coming from a particular geographical area would indicate that providing more content in a particular language would be beneficial, and so on. The in-built assumption is that in order to create a more desirable and effective product, you need to know more about the people to whom you are marketing your product.

As far as the public use of this apparatus goes, its primary purpose is one of optimisation and responsiveness. Through observation, categorisation and the studying of visitor behaviour, a web manager can progressively tailor the website towards particular goals — be that facilitating online transactions, collecting information, increasing exposure to boost the value of advertising space and so on. In its most essential form, it allows producers to engineer the web environments to be as effective and enjoyable as possible — certainly valuable information.

As far as this contrasts with older, pre-digital marketing tools, the effect is significant. Instead of only investing in creative campaigns that may or may not lead to a long-term positive advocacy of a brand amongst a loosely-defined audience, the exact efficacy of individual digital marketing products can be assessed. If you are spending x on a particular advert for a web product and making y as a result of that advert (as tracking the journey directly from advert to action is now possible), if x > y then you can reassess and optimise your campaign to tailor your marketing to be at its most effective. While the older methods of long-term advocacy are still valuable and in use, the advantages of digital marketing provide a complementary insight that was previously unavailable. There is also the integrity of market data to be considered — while advocacy was measured through anecdotal interviews, actual engagement can now be measured without needing people to tell you what they think. The scope for white lies, telling the interviewer what they want to hear and the limiting effects of group sampling have been ameliorated by a second set of thorough, quantitative audience data based on total observation.

Once we recognise the opportunities for biopower to be exerted in a virtual space like the Internet, it is easy to see how the effects of this influence can be seen and felt in the ‘offline’, non-virtual world. There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that even a mere familiarity with interacting online has a measurable effect on the way a person thinks, and the opportunities for advertising and marketing are also significant. Add to that the fact that ‘Internet money’ is still ‘real’ money and we see an environment that provides ample opportunity for large institutions to exert a very real biopower — and biopolitical parties are taking those opportunities.

While it is true that a great number of parties are involved in the collection of this kind of surveillance data, it is not necessarily the case that all of the data goes to any one central store or is processed in any one particular way. In the case of Google Analytics, each website using the service has a blinkered view of user activity on that site but the providers of the Analytics service have the benefit of an overview of the user behaviour across all participating websites. There are other services, sometimes used in parallel and sometimes not, that can offer deeper behavioural insights or more optimisation options for the reporting itself. These different service providers don’t pool their data together, due to competition and compatibility issues, which might seem to contradict this picture of a Panoptical internet.

However, as the infamous [Snowden leaks](http://www.theguardian.com/world/edward-snowden) have revealed, there is certainly an extent to which data held by various disparate parties can be accessed by agencies of governments who legislate over territories where these service providers are physically based. Where illegal activities are sought to be conducted over the internet, whether ‘moral’ or otherwise, there is ample concern that surveillance data tantamount to legal evidence could end up in the hands of governments that might seek prosecution. Service providers often publish and share anonymised statistics in order to report on trends and establish themselves as authorities on their markets. Increasingly we see that the observers of the internet are a network themselves that can be seen as being at the centre of a grand Internet Panopticon, where the enormous quantity of data warrants that relevant data is mandated to relevant nodes.

The internet, insofar as it presents these opportunities for surveillance of varying degrees, has come to be defined in terms of an opposition. This opposition arose out of the development and proliferation of anti-surveillance tools, usually based on advanced encryption and peer-to-peer technologies that consumer products were increasingly able to utilise. What is especially notable about the way these technologies are used is that they have created another online space, essentially public in the same way that the internet under surveillance is public except that anonymity rather than privacy is the guarantor of liberty. On this “Dark Web” a space is created whereby the benefits of public interaction can be enjoyed while avoiding some of the drawbacks of being under surveillance. And it is the Dark Web that has given the surveilled internet the moniker of Light Web.

The language of light versus dark bears with it many connotations. In the classic religious or ‘Star Wars’ sense there is the implication of good versus evil. In perhaps a more descriptive sense this language depicts a contrast of being exposed versus being hidden. We may also infer an analogy of the pedestrian versus the arcane. The many connotations are probably equally valid, but they all tend towards a conception of seen versus non-seen, and this raises a pertinent question: *seen by whom*?

<hr>

Google isn’t the only organisation with a financial interest in big data. Many groups that offer ‘free’ online tools monetise this software-as-service by analysing and utilising the data they gain from the Panoptical user activity metrics enabled by a virtual environment, whether by selling targeted advertising space or by selling the data in some processed/mediated form. This raises the question of how/why there is such a tendency for this surveillance, why it is of such value in the current economy. This can partly be answered in terms of biopower, but can also be set in a global politico-economic context through an understanding of Hardt & Negri’s *Empire*.

Empire, summarily, is the tendency afforded by global capitalism to transcend (or to imagine to be transcendent of) all boundaries. Where previously state imperialism, though widespread and with the goal of constant expansion, was still paradigmatically tied to the Other — the ‘enemy,’ barbarians’ or ‘people in need of democracy’ — postmodern empire ontologically moves towards a comprehensive hegemony. There is no constituted Other, only Empire; homogenous, ubiquitous and even axiomatic. In the new paradigm of Empire, “it is as if the new order were already constituted,” as the right to arbitrate over constituents is assumed from the outset rather than undertaking any process of seizure or subjugation.

Contemporary capitalism, in its project “to bring together economic power and political power,” assumes its position at the apex of Empire and the legitimacy to apply this project worldwide. If political biopower is enabled by surveillance so too must economic power be characterised by an omniscience in order to make the link between these powers inseparable and thus bring about an essentially economic biopower.

The silicon revolution took computing power and applied it to some of the largest and most embedded institutions first and foremost, with early computational power being prohibitively expensive for most individuals. Military and state-funded scientific communications took precedent, being the source of the technology itself, but not far behind were the financial institutions that depended on accurate calculations on vast amounts of data and the ability to share and exchange such data internationally. The digital economy was quickly born.

> The money that banks create isn’t the paper money that bears the logo of the government-owned Bank of England. It’s the electronic money that flashes up on the screen when you check your balance at an ATM. Right now, this electronic money (bank deposits) makes up over 97% of all the money in the economy. Only 3% of money is still in that old-fashioned form of real cash that you can touch.

- [Positive Money: How banks create money](http://www.positivemoney.org/how-money-works/how-banks-create-money)

The bulk of transactions that take place within our cities are now digital, and worldwide the trend is growing more towards a digital economy over a ‘paper’ economy. This arguably benefits the financial institutions over the participants in these exchanges (it seems a mixed blessing for people, who are now potential victims of identity theft and other cybercrimes, whereas there appears to be no downside for the institutions that own the means of digital economic production), and the power to influence behaviours that encourage such a trend certainly lies with those institutions. While there will continue to be exceptions (the 3% of hard cash in the GBP economy, and varied proportions in other economies) the Pound Sterling certainly now has a digital, that is to say *virtual*, aspect. It is this virtuality that enables such a degree of surveillance that can, in turn, bring about a similar flow of economic biopower.

Virtual currencies, entangled with their hard analogues, represent a shift in the ontology of economic exchange and practice. Where such exchange using a national currency is construed as participation in citizenship, virtual exchange can thus be construed as a kind of virtual citizenship.

It is, however, important to note that currency has always been virtual by its very nature. Whether exchange is mediated by a unitary denomination or takes a more direct approach, a certain comparison between items is necessarily made. This valuation can be (and often is) extremely relative, contingent and fluid as the agreed-upon equivalence of items for trade is always mediated by the imagination — positing the future worth of the items in exchange. This critical mediatory role of the imagination assures its core virtuality, and the proliferation of digital technologies for the purpose of facilitating exchange has only amplified that intrinsic relativity, contingency and fluidity, rather than having introduced it.

Nonetheless, it must also be accepted that digital technologies of exchange have somewhat brought into focus the virtuality of exchange. As far as we are concerned with the self-identities of the citizens of whom we speak, there is certainly reason to suppose that their citizenship has grown ‘more virtual’ with the increased proliferation of digital technologies for exchange. Where previously it was the abstract denomination or even simply the *value* that was virtual, now the medium of currency itself has become virtual too.

Though alternative digital currency gained its first crucial boost in value largely from Dark Web exchanges, the public recognition of that value has enabled its ongoing foray into the Light Web. This makes a fascinating case of mediation as vital process, since it was the media event of the Bitcoin boom that facilitated continued appreciation (in both the emotional and the economic senses) of the currency, positioning it as a genuine intrusion of cryptocurrency into the panoptical Empire.

The question of to what degree Bitcoin represents a challenge to the panoptical Empire can be discovered using two complementary methods — firstly insofar as cryptocurrency seems contrary to the aims and methods employed by the Empire (as Hardt & Negri have posited the ‘global order’), and secondly insofar as governments and other representatives of this ‘global order’ have taken steps to either quell or recuperate it.

[A full explanation of Bitcoin](http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf), its origin, the nature of its algorithm and mining etc are of course relevant to any discussion of the biopolitical significance of cryptocurrency — but for brevity this essay will detail only some of its more social aspects.

Bitcoin is the currency that currently has the greatest exchange rate of all cryptocurrencies, accordingly because of its popularity. It doesn’t require centralised administration from a bank or similar body as it is administered by a network of independent computer systems using a common protocol. Various bitcoin transfer and other facilities exist, which tend to charge fees that are significantly lower (and less frequent) than the traditional currency equivalents.

All exchanges of Bitcoin are entirely public and are facilitated by what is known as the “block chain” network — the shared public ledger on which the entire Bitcoin network relies. Transactions between wallets are coordinated on this service, which is composed of a robust network of mining machines that is tremendously secure (to illustrate, any machine seeking to compromise the network would need to be capable of overwhelming every machine node in the network, rather than compromising a single, weaker node). This is reinforced with ‘military-grade’ cryptography, but this doesn’t mean that there is no fraud or theft that occurs. Any such robbery is (or, at least, has been so far) an unfortunate result of chicanery against the human element in the process.

What all this means in practice is that currency exchanges can take place, without the sole oversight of central or private banks and governments, in a genuinely peer-to-peer method of using software on one’s own computer to instigate the transaction. Instead of the intermediary being a bank, the intermediary ‘institution’ is the block chain, a network of computers that anyone can join with sufficient equipment and utilisation of the protocols. Despite current pushes for Bitcoin to be used in all manner of exchanges — from cars to computers to digital or editorial services — its surge in value was carried principally by its use in the exchange of generally illegal goods and services — from narcotics to stolen goods and even (apparently) assassination services. These exchanges take place using Bitcoin via the Dark Web, while extra measures must be taken to ensure a degree of anonymity from the block chain and hence a distancing from any Panoptical surveilling eye. These measures can be equated to laundering in the context of conventional currency, and usually involve the use of multiple transactions across multiple wallets in order to obfuscate the sources (in conventional, trackable, currency) and identities of the parties involved.

As Bitcoin moved into the mainstream it was no longer an underground alternative, and a number of nation states have questioned whether it should be prohibited. China and India have called this issue into question first, while the Russian Prosecutor General’s Office said on 6 February 2014:

> Systems for anonymous payments and cyber currencies that have gained considerable circulation — including the most well-known, Bitcoin — are money substitutes and cannot be used by individuals or legal entities.

- Reported by [Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/02/09/us-russia-bitcoin-idUSBREA1806620140209)

Exercising state sovereignty over currency may seem like Hardt & Negri’s ‘old’ Imperial approach, but the collaboration of nation states for the dominance of inter-acknowledged and legitimated currencies is a distinct sign of Empire in action. Taking the ideology of Empire to its extreme, one might think that a single international currency would be agreeable — but there are significant excepting factors that mean Bitcoin cannot be legitimated currently. Firstly, that the nature of this cryptocurrency is antithetical to the privileged surveillance of economic exchange, secondly, that the ‘ground-up’ origins of this particular cryptocurrency means that control can’t be exerted on the full number of such currencies in use (LiteCoin and DogeCoin being only two of an already growing economy of yet more ground-up cryptocurrencies). It should be noted that not all state sovereignties have taken a similar stance against Bitcoin — although the USA has taken steps against Silk Road in the past (a narcotics trading platform in the Dark Web that uses cryptocurrency exchange) it is seen as comparatively ‘pro-‘ Bitcoin. The Bank of Cyprus also publicly acknowledged on Feb 25th 2014 that “[Bitcoin is not illegal](http://www.bitcoinx.com/central-bank-cyprus-bitcoin-illegal/),” following an extended period of post-2008 crisis that left many Cypriots with little faith in their nationalist economic system.

However mainstream Bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies may become, their cryptographic (and yet open) nature prohibits the kind of rigorous surveillance that has become the standard for modern digital currency. As a result of the near-impossibility of the accurate surveillance of exchange, the principal (and possibly legitimate) concern raised — against which Bitcoin supporters and institutions are defending — is that of money laundering, a worry to those concerned with retaining control over modes of economy.

Bitcoin can be seen to represent a direct challenge to modern, multi-nationalist conceptions of economy, where all transactions are centrally monitored and economic citizens are accountable to their purchases. In an approach similar to the Spartacus defence, except multiplied as many times as a computer could fathom, cryptocurrency offers a contrast to and a different way of imagining how a global digital economy might work with a devolved, less concentrated, spread of biopower through surveillance.

So we have seen how surveillance is used on the internet and how it is countered, with reflections on the biopolitical context — what the implications are of this on the concentration or dispersal of biopower. Is this the whole story? If cryptocurrencies represent the antithesis of concentrated economic surveillance, are they also antithetical to the concentration of biopower? To what extent is Bitcoin really a challenge to the workings of biopolitical Empire?

<hr>

In cultural theory, it is often frowned upon to form dichotomies — and quite rightly. False dichotomies are not only rife but seem deeply appealing as a simple way of interpreting the world. Deconstructing these dichotomies remains fertile academic territory.

The dichotomy of Dark Web versus Light Web was established outside of this essay, even though only the term Dark Web has gained much prominence the dichotomy is already implied, with an array of connotations and a somewhat definite distinction made between them. It is a study of these connotations that is relevant to the study of digital media. How far this dichotomy can be deconstructed remains to be seen, and the cultural battles to do so are being fought on many fronts.

While Bitcoin appears to be growing in strength, with a number of prominent private investors taking an interest, the fact that its software philosophy seems so antithetical to that of global Empire as Hardt & Negri see it might make us question its longevity. If Bitcoin does prove to be a resilient alternative to the Panoptical nationalist economic norm, what kinds of attempts to undermine it might we expect?

Prohibition might be one reaction, one that we have seen some nation states adopt and others not. While growing in popularity, there is an extent to which it may not reach a ‘critical mass’ whereby it has any calculable effect on the prosperity and ubiquity of nationalist currencies, and thus such a direct intervention may not be warranted. Another possible reaction may be one of what the Situationists termed *recuperation* — a more insidious undermining that involves a repressive system “projecting its own meanings and goals onto[…] oppositional activities”. This might involve, for instance, the mass buying of bitcoin by financial institutions in order to control its value followed by a callous promotion of Bitcoin as an approved alternative — an alternative that is under control.

Even if Bitcoin were recuperated or legitimised, there would still be an open question around the degree to which the open-source cryptography and digital counter-surveillance movement can be contrary to the Panoptical aims of Empire.

Žižek posits that “if you take away from our reality the symbolic fictions that regulate it, you lose reality itself,” suggesting that we cannot even *imagine* a post-capitalist world, that this biopower extends deeper than merely into the biological. One might be tempted to call it phenomeno-political, as it not only concerns the body as capital but the entire Being — the soul that Foucault highlights as the contemporary object of discipline.

There is an extent to which Empire, the source of many of our regulatory symbolic fictions (such as individualist freedom as the morality of market liberalism), cannot be overcome using the same symbolic fictions it uses to sustain itself. Capitalism is in perpetual crisis and this crisis does not appear to be leading inextricably to global communism, as century-old Marxists once held true. The popularity of Bitcoin is arguably formed upon a foundation of the liberalist morality of free, unregulated trade. If that is the case, its presentation as being subversive against the global Empire morality may be unfounded and the promised redistribution of biopower becomes unimaginable.

This denotes a truly comprehensive dominance, an empire of imagination and not just culture, biopolitical in its most intimate sense, a sense that is ‘beyond measure’.

> “[B]eyond measure” refers to the vitality of the productive context, the expression of labor as desire, and its capacities to constitute the biopolitical fabric of Empire from below[…] Beyond measure refers to a virtuality that invests the entire biopolitical fabric of imperial globalization[…] By the virtual we understand the set of powers to act (being, loving, transforming, creating) that reside in the multitude.

Through a reading of this passage and of Žižek, we bring forth a portrait of the malignancy of Empire — its postmodern ubiquity. Hardt & Negri’s notion of the postmodern “beyond measure”, as contrasted against their modern notion of “outside measure”, reveals a paradox worth mentioning. Outside measure refers to the excesses of imperialism that abide by a particular index of value. This modernist approach warranted a constant vigilance for contingencies that might turn subversive — that imperialism could be undermined was a real, though unlikely, possibility. Beyond measure, however, in its shirking of a single index or measure and its encompassing of all values, guarantees that such ‘subversive’ contingencies are necessary, accommodated and controlled.

> Even if in postmodern capitalism there is no longer a fixed scale that measures value, value nonetheless is still powerful and ubiquitous.

The paradox here is that although there is no fixed scale of value with which to measure, the value of measurement through surveillance has only increased and can be seen quite clearly in the prevalence of monitoring faculties in digital virtual environments.

It is the degree of Bitcoin’s superficiality that is in question: though undermining the Panoptical surveillance of financial transactions, we might want to say that it does not — that it cannot — present any real challenge to the workings of Empire. If that is the case, if Bitcoin cannot effect a redistribution of biopower through antagonising its sustaining economic surveillance, then this calls into question how necessary the relationship is between surveillance and biopolitics.

Even though the core principles of denomination of value, wealth and gain, de-politicised investment and so on remain unscathed in the medium of Bitcoin, the surveillance of almost all possession and exchange that is prevalent in the digitised economy is still undermined, even if this doesn’t actually result in a drastic redistribution of biopower. Surely this is worth something?

Bitcoin in this respect presents a conundrum — as an example it suggests that surveillance, or at least total visibility, doesn’t necessarily equate to supplementing the paradigm of capitalist biopower.

In terms of dichotomies then, although the seen/unseen Light/Dark webs are real and accurate terms, trying to correlate that with a dichotomy of Empire/alternativism is problematic.

Surveillance does indeed contribute to the working of biopolitics however, and the extent to which Bitcoin can or cannot undermine Empire does not counter Foucault’s essential premise that observation and biopower are intrinsically linked. Surveillance and control can be managed through various methods and apparatus. Subverting one of these methods, as Bitcoin attempts, cannot constitute the subversion of control.
