---
layout: post
title: "Creative Evolution: straddling the fence of positivism?"
permalink: creative-evolution-straddling-the-fence-of-positivism
---

Vital process is the term used to describe what our understanding of media should shift to, away from a fascination with mere objects - phones, watches, TVs etc - and towards the social, biological and technical processes in which these objects are embedded. Vital process gives a more holistic picture of the ways of being that we find ourselves participating in when we engage with new media. This approach brings new and digital media study closer to anthropology, but with a particular (and conscientious) focus on ‘modern’ societies that have the economic power to wield these media technologies.

The term ‘vital process’ owes much, including its etymology, to the work of Henri Bergson who, in his 1907 publication called *Creative Evolution* posits a metaphysical *élan vital* (or vital impetus) as an alternative explanation to the nascent Darwinism that was being explored to describe the process of evolution. *Life after New Media* comes to refer to Bergson a number of times, in a manner that is perhaps less crucial to the overall theme of the book than its name might suggest. But, where the notion of creative evolution does come into play, we find at certain times parallels and at other times carefully avoided conflicts with another field of study - this time from the other side of the positivist versus antipositivist divide, that of memetics.

Let’s quickly examine a short quote from *Life after New Media*, where Sarah and Joanna quote from Gumpert and Cathcart’s essay *A theory of mediation* (1990):

> To the extent that human’s mental processes allow them to make complex and varied extensions of themselves, one might see the development of media technology, in the loosest sense, as a form of biological development. We may infer that the principles of biological evolution can be used to explain media evolution. We would call this a biotechnological explanation of mediation.

Taking ‘media technology’ as a form of social behaviour, as *Life after New Media* recommends, we find here a postulation that the empirically-derived principles of evolution, as revealed in the natural sciences, look like they should be applicable to certain areas within the field of cultural study. Is this not the very essence of the practice of positivism, yet arising within the antipositivist field of cultural studies?

Let us quickly also refer to the firmly positivist counterpart to this claim, best highlighted at its origin - the 1976 publication by Richard Dawkins called *The Selfish Gene*. Here is described biological evolution in terms of the Neo-Darwinian synthesis (combining the old Darwinism with modern Mendelian genetics) and a later chapter in the book coins the term, for the first time, of a meme. The meme, quite briefly, is a hypothetical unit of behavioural evolution that can be treated in the same way that genes can be regarded as the units of biological evolution - the study of which is called memetics.

The same conclusion, that this process called evolution arises in both the biological and cultural fields, seems to be coming from two very different camps. In the one camp, falsifiable empiricism is seen as the definitive source of ‘truth’ - or as close to truth as can be reached. The other camp rejects this notion, saying that the social realm may not be subject to the same methods of investigation as the natural world. Are these conclusions about evolution indeed the same, or is there something distinct about each? And, if a scholar seeks to avoid being partisan, is it possible to navigate this field while avoiding the obstacle course of making one claim or the other?

Sarah and Joanna’s book, as a contemporary utilisation of creative evolution, inevitably explores areas where assertions can be compared with contemporary understandings of biological evolution. Historically, creative evolution predates what is known as the Neo-Darwinian synthesis, where Darwinian evolution found its compatibility with Mendelian genetics and radically changed both the theoretical and empirical discourses of evolution in the natural sciences. This synthesis itself doesn’t contradict Bergsonian creative evolution, but it does set an interesting stage whereby empirically obtained learnings can be used directly alongside a generally anti-positivist, cultural theory.

We can see Sarah and Joanna’s cognisance of this fact as they approach these issues whereby passages descriptive of creative evolution come to resemble Neo-Darwinian descriptions of biological evolution. They speak of “the entanglement of the processes of natural and technical evolution” when addressing this resemblance.

Conscious of this close resemblance, but unwilling to take it further, they use qualifying words and phrases such as “hinting”, “without drawing any particular conclusions” or “scientific truth is of less interest to us”.

Yet, when addressing the above citation of Gumpert and Cathcart (making the comparison between biological and media evolution), they continue:

> The literalness of this proposition, or its scientific “truth,” is of less interest to us than it’s conceptual and rhetorical force, the idea that looking at analogies between biological organisms and media in terms of their complexity, adaptability and specialisation may allow us to shift the perspective of what counts as media, or even lead to the recognition of the poetic, creative impulse, beyond that of human volition, in what Heidegger called “the growing things of nature as well as whatever is completed through the crafts and the arts.”

Here we see a trajectory towards a unified, empirical approach to evolution in full throttle, only to narrowly miss in favour of a more analogous approach. The question arises, from this careful circumventing of anything bordering on a falsifiable empirical hypothesis, of in what way is evolution being treated here? Is it something in the world (a fact of our reality, like the conditions and process of combustion) or is it an amorphous and fluid signifier that may not point to anything in the world? Is evolution a thing, like fire, or just a word, like love?

Where evolution is mentioned in *Life after New Media* we can find hints at two, seemingly opposing, positions in the positivist versus anti-positivist conflict. On the one hand, that evolution is a general process or activity - applicable to the surfacing of both biological and cultural novelty - that is supported by empirical evidence and therefore cultural versions of this theory should not contradict any evidence from the natural sciences. On the other hand, that not only do we not know (or have agreed upon, at least,) enough about biological evolution to make worthwhile cultural claims from it, but that regardless of its origin the word “evolution” has a meaning of its own - a meaning that is necessarily separate to the natural force. The distinction between these two positions is highlighted most simply by the acknowledgement of the difference between the signifier and signified that is pored over in cultural theory and virtually dismissed in the natural sciences.

My question of the book is this: in their dealing with creative evolution in this context, have they stepped into positivism (with one foot firmly rooted in anti positivism) or have they in fact not taken any such step at all? Do they need to, and does bridging the gap between positivism and antipositivism have any merit?

<hr>

*[Life after New Media](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/life-after-new-media-0)* (MIT Press, 2012) by Sarah Kember and Joanna Zylinska is a must-read for anyone interested in digital media. I'm very proud to be a student of theirs.